# Room Host Guidelines

## TL;DR

* Being a room-host is an active role that has a high impact on the quality of
  the conference and the appreciation of the attendees and speakers in each
session.

* There is no TL;DR excuse accepted. Please read the entire document to be a
  good room host.

## Description of the role

The room host is in charge of helping the speakers to worry only about their
presentation and to make it clear to the audience when the presentation starts,
when they can ask questions, when it is over, and what is coming next.

Please keep in mind each conference, venue and every speaker is different, which
means your task and duties may vary slightly. As a room host you need to be
flexible, adaptable and comfortable in your interactions.

## Getting ready

Collect a bag with items you need while being a room host from the organisers:

* Time tracker boards (15, 10, 5, stop, etc on them)

* Adapters for changing from usb-c or DP to HDMI for example should you need it

* Clicker/slide forwarder (connects via usb) in case the speaker doesn’t have
  one

## Before the presentation

* The room host must be in the room before the speaker arrives to welcome them

* Check the connection from the laptop to the projector

* Check that the clicker to switch slides works correctly

* Check the batteries of the microphone(s)

* Help the speaker to set up the microphone

* Each speaker is individual and therefore you should:

    - Clarify with the speaker when they want to take questions, during or at
      the end (we recommend at the end to manage the time better)

    - Explain where you will be sitting down and when you will show the 'time
      tracker' boards. (Remaining time to be to the end of the overall session
(usually the case) or early to leave time for questions)

    - Ask if the speaker would like you to introduce them once everything is
      ready.

* Thank the audience, introduce the speaker, then start clapping / ask for an
  applause.

### IMPORTANT:

Avoid reading the first slide: "this is... euh... Simon Riggs, and he will be
talking about... hmm...  The Next 20 Years..." Everybody can read
that first slide, so try to care a bit more and learn the name of the speaker,
and something that resembles the title. Or at least that no one sees you
reading.

### OPTIONAL:

Ask the speaker in advance a fun fact that could be shared during the
introduction. Something like a favourite book, film, sport, hobby, country of
origin, anything. The speakers usually have a slide with their technical
profile, hence, explaining something extra will be an added value. In addition,
if the speaker for instance plays guitar, and someone in the audience also plays
guitar, it immediately creates a connection and the person starts listening more
actively.

## During the presentation

* Pay attention to the talk.

* If no one asks a question, it is good that you ask one.You can also ask the
  speaker if he has one he would like you to use. Always have a question ready
for the end. Even if it is just a clarification of something shown during the
presentation.

* Keep track of the time and remind the speaker how much time is left using the
  “time tracker” boards..

### OPTIONAL:

Take a picture of the speaker during the presentation and tweet about it. The
speaker may even ask you to take some pictures.

## End of the presentation

* If the speaker doesn't show any sign of finishing in the agreed time. Stand up
  and make yourself visible to the speaker, so that they know time is up.

* If the speaker manages time well, start clapping when they finish, especially
  if no one does, and stand up if appropriate.

* Thank the speaker and look for rising hands in the audience for questions

    - If the speaker is calling on the people with questions. Just be ready with
      the microphone if you need one (larger rooms)

    - If the speaker is just waiting there, it is your role to manage who asks
      the questions.

    - If no one asks a question, you should ask one. Sometimes this simple act
      triggers other people asking more questions.

* Be mindful about the time. Don't let the round of questions go beyond the
  scheduled time.

* After the questions are over (or if there is no more time), tell the audience
  what is coming next (next presentation, coffee-break or lunch, etc), and close
the session asking for another applause for the speaker.

* Help the speaker uninstall everything and make sure no one forgets anything.

Make sure you collect all the items after each talk (sometimes speakers take
things by accident) and once your shift is over, take the bag back to the place
you collected it from.

## Difficult tasks you must be comfortable with

* Don't let the speaker run beyond the time scheduled for their talk.

* Don't let a member of the audience monopolise the round of questions. If you
  see someone asking one question after the other, say something like: "I see
other hands rising, so let's allow other members of the audience to ask their
questions… Slonik, please, you go next"

